---
title: Sports Psychology For Dummies
author: Leif Smith and Todd Kays
date: 2025-06-01
url: /reading/sports-psych-fd
---
My mom gifted this book to me at a time when I was struggling with my mental health and happiness. On the tennis court, I was particularly struggling with enjoying the sport which I had loved since a little kid. I think my mom wanted to give me some inspiration and tools to help me deal with my feelings both on and off the court. Since we couldn't afford a sports psychologist, she looked to the next best thing: a book. That book was _Sports Psychology for Dummies_ by Leif Smith and Todd Kays. 
<br> While Smith and Kays raise numerous points that are both practical and easy to understand, I'd like to focus on a couple that have helped me to continue to imrpove my mental game. I refer back to these ideas almost daily. 
First, to get the most out of one's mental performance, one must know their optimal performance mindset. Smith and Kays explain that as humans, our default mindset is negative. Athletes, especially perfectionist athletes, habitually criticize themselves even for the smallest of mistakes. However, to perform at one's best, one must celebrate the positive aspects of their performance. Celebrating these positive aspects will help an athlete to focus on what their strengths are and what mental cues are important for optimal performance. Emphasizing positive aspects of performance can also boost confidence since the athlete must recall what happened and how they felt when they have played their best. To reinfore my optimal performance mindset, I began to journal. I wrote down how I prepared and how I felt when I've performed my best. Then, in practice and in matches, I worked to replicate this preparation and the feelings I had. After great matches and practices, I add to my optimal performace journal. I recall how I prepared for that match or practice, what I was thinking, and how I was feeling on court. I consistently revisit my optimal performance journal throughout the week and before matches so that I can remind myself of the strategies that I must use to play my best. 
The next strategy that I've used consistently is goal-setting. Smith and Kays break down goal-setting into four parts; long-term goals, midterm goals, short-term goals, and immediate goals. Athletes who acheive great things must set great goals. To achieve such goals, they should be successive and cumulative (before becoming an All-American, you must be All-Conference etc). It's a step-by-step process. First, long-term goals help athletes to feel inspired and focused. They push athletes to greater heights. They are like the north-stars of goal-setting. They set you on your course. Long-term goals should be set about 1 to 3 years from the present. Next, midterm goals are those goals that will help you to achieve your long-term goals. They should be achieved in about six months or half a season. Smith and Kays explain these goals as _process goals_. They are the plan for how you go about doing things. For example, to win the wrestling state championhip, a wrestler may need to become the most physically fit wrestler in the state. To become the most physically fit wrestler, the athlete needs some short term goals. The wrestler may set the goal of running 2 miles in under 12 minutes. Finally, immediate goals are things that the athlete can do right now to give themselves a better chance at acheiving their short-term goals. To run 2 miles in under 12 minutes, the wrestler may time their 2 mile run at the end of each week, tracking their progress over the course of the season. 
